Part 2 (40 Marks)

Pay off from attending private school.

For every family, the payoff for sending their child to private school is equal to the benefit from private education minus tuition fees and VAT.

x = number of families that send their child to public school. 

Y= 3- x = Number of families attending private schools. 

F= y ⋅ t = Total private school fees. 

Therefore, the payoff functions from attending private school are:

Low-income family (L):



Middle-income family (M):



High-income family (H):



The parameters satisfy:



These payoff functions describe the utility of each family from attending private school.

Explanation of terms

The parameter Pi captures heterogeneity in preferences for private education across income groups, reflecting differences in ability and willingness to pay. 

The term   captures peer effects and school quality in private schools, which increase with total resources but exhibit diminishing returns. 

The term  represents the total price paid for private schooling, including tuition fees and VAT, and therefore captures the direct financial cost imposed by the policy. 

In conclusion, these payoff functions formalise how VAT on private school fees affect families differently through income-dependent preferences, peer effects in private schools, and high effective prices of private education.













Conditions for equilibrium school choices 

A family chooses private school if and only if:



According to the model, the payoff from attending public school is:



Scenario 1:

Low-income family attends public school

Middle-income and High-income families attend private school

So, x=1, y=3-x=2

Total private school fees:

F=yt=2t

Total VAT revenue:

T= τty= 2τt

Where x= number of families attending public school 

Where T= the total VAT revenue raised from private school fees.



Payoffs in scenario 1:



Public school payoff (Low-income families)



Private school payoff (middle- and high-income families)







If there is no-deviation conditions:



Low-income families don’t deviate to private school 

Required:



Middle-income family doesn’t deviate to public school but if they do:







Similarly, high-income family doesn’t deviate to public school so:



Since PH> PM, this condition is automatically satisfied if it holds for the middle-income family. 



Scenario 1 is an equilibrium if:





One set of values satisfying this condition is:



Under these conditions, the low-income family attends public school while middle and high-income families attend private school in equilibrium. 



















 VAT revenue and public-school funding 

In scenario 2: 

Low-income family= public school

Middle-income family= public school 

High-income family= private school 

Thus:



Total private school fees:



Total VAT revenue:





Payoffs in scenario 2

Public school payoff (for L and M):







Private school payoff (for H):





No deviation conditions

Low-income family doesn’t deviate to private school:



Middle-income family doesn’t deviate to private school:



Since, PM>PL, this condition is binding for both L and M. 



High-income family doesn’t deviate to public school.

X=3,  y=0  T=0

Public school pay off after deviation:





Equilibrium conditions

Scenario 2 is an equilibrium if:



And



Example numerical values



To conclude, this proves that the low and middle-income families attend public school while the high-income family attends private school in equilibri